README.md, before:

# Address Artisan

Address Artisan is a vanity Bitcoin address generator based on [BIP32](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki) xpub key derivation and is:

- 🔒 **Secure**: Generates vanity addresses even for hardware wallets! 🤯
- ⚡ **Fast**: Built in Rust/OpenCL with fast public key derivation, prefix matching and GPU support. 🚀
- 🎯 **Versatile**: Supports both "Legacy" (P2PKH) and Native SegWit (P2WPKH). Your address, your style! 🎉

## Get the Address Artisan

You can install the tool using:

```bash
cargo install address-artisan
```

Or clone the repository and build it:

```bash
cargo build --release
```

## Usage

The tool requires 2 mandatory arguments (`xpub` and `prefix`) and accepts several optional arguments:

- `--xpub` (`-x`): Extended public key (obtainable from almost any Bitcoin wallet)
- `--prefix` (`-p`): Desired address prefix (must start with "1" or "bc1q")
- `--max-depth` (`-m`): Maximum depth of the last derivation path (default: 1000). A larger max-depth means better utilization of the key space and cache. However, an address may get buried in a large gap, and since [account discovery](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki#user-content-Account_discovery) is designed to be sequential, it may take time for the wallet to find it after increasing the gap limit. Testing suggests 100,000 is an optimal value, causing only a 3-second wallet freeze during setup.
- `--cpu-threads` (`-t`): Number of CPU threads to use (default: 0 = auto-detect physical cores)
- `--gpu` (`-g`): Enable GPU processing (excludes integrated/onboard GPUs). Can optionally specify GPU IDs: `--gpu 0,1` or `--gpu 0 1`. Without IDs, all available GPUs are used
- `--gpu-only`: Use only GPU for processing (no CPU, excludes integrated/onboard GPUs). Can be combined with `--gpu` to specify which GPUs to use

For detailed information, use the help command:

```bash
address-artisan --help
```

### Device Selection Examples

```bash
# CPU only (auto-detect cores)
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix>

# CPU with 8 threads
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> -t 8

# Use all available GPUs + CPU
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu

# Use GPU 0 + CPU
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu 0

# Use GPU 0 and GPU 2 + CPU
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu 0,2

# Use all GPUs, no CPU
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu-only

# Use only GPU 1, no CPU
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu 1 --gpu-only

# Use GPUs 0 and 1, plus CPU with 4 threads
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu 0 1 -t 4
```

**Note:** If you specify an invalid GPU ID, the program will display the available GPUs on your system. Integrated/onboard GPUs are automatically excluded.

For a complete walkthrough with all steps and details, check the [Example](#example) section.

## ⚠️ **WARNING**

Yes, it's completely safe to use this tool. But be aware of the following:

- Don't send funds to the vanity address without first confirming it appears in the addresses list.
- Store the derivation path and address index to always be able to recover funds. It's even possible to save them on the [Bitcoin Blockchain](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/OP_RETURN).

Again, see the [Example](#example) section for a complete and safe walkthrough.

## BIP44 Compliance

While this tool is **not** (and cannot be) compliant with [BIP44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki), it can be used with BIP44-compliant wallets. Here's how it works:

BIP44 standardizes 5 levels of derivation:

```
m / purpose' / coin_type' / account' / change / address_index
```

Where:

- `m`: Master key
- `purpose'`: Purpose identifier following [BIP43](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0043.mediawiki) (e.g., 44' for P2PKH)
- `coin_type'`: Coin identifier, following [SLIP44](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0044.md). 0' (0x80000000) for Bitcoin
- `account'`: Account number for funds organization - greater than or equal to 0' (0x80000000)
- `change`: Like a boolean flag - 0 (0x00) for receive addresses, 1 (0x01) for change addresses
- `address_index`: Address index

This tool brute-forces a path of the form:

```
xpub_path' / seed0 / seed1 / b / a / 0 / address_index
```

Where:

- `xpub_path'`: User-provided hardened derivation path
- `seed0/seed1`: 62-bit entropy for unique key space per run - each less than 0' (0x80000000)
- `b/a`: Two derivation paths for key space expansion - each less than 0' (0x80000000)
- `0`: Constant 0 (0x00) for BIP44-compliant wallet compatibility
- `address_index`: Address index within the account - less than _max_depth_ CLI argument

By maintaining 0 as the second-to-last derivation path, BIP44-compliant wallets will recognize the vanity address as the *address_index*th receive address when using `xpub_path' / seed0 / seed1 / b / a` as the wallet's input path.

## Example

The following example demonstrates the complete process of generating and using a vanity address with this tool. The [Sparrow](https://github.com/sparrowwallet/sparrow) wallet will be used for this demonstration.

### Get the xpub

First, a working wallet needs to be set up.

It's recommended to create a new wallet with a custom derivation path using a dedicated purpose for vanity addresses. There's no need to generate a new seed phrase or reset the hardware wallet - using a different derivation path allows keeping existing wallet funds completely separate.

1. Create a new wallet

Create a new wallet using either your seed phrase/private key or your hardware wallet.

![New wallet](./assets/new_p2pkh_wallet.png)

2. On the next screen, set up the derivation path. I propose to use the following path:

```
m/10495330'/0'/0'
```

This path uses:

- Purpose: 10495330' (which spells "vnty" in base58) for vanity addresses
- Coin type: 0' (0x80000000) for Bitcoin ([SLIP44](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0044.md))
- Account: 0' (0x80000000)

Note: Make sure to include the ' after each number to ensure hardened derivation.

![New wallet derivation path](./assets/new_wallet_derivation_path.png)

3. The next screen will display the xpub. In this example:
   `xpub6DRyCVn7t9e3DjUphcExjExY7NMw6mC4ZqzKZT8knao5YbVZ5iNHdaj1SibbsVdyreoWqeMPrNcNv7fbwLpmY2PrEQ8ttdtsdBy6fvpUoMk`

This value should be copied for the next step.

![New wallet xpub](./assets/new_wallet_xpub.png)

### Generate the Vanity Address

Run the tool with the xpub and desired prefix:

```
address-artisan --xpub xpub6DRyCVn7t9e3DjUphcExjExY7NMw6mC4ZqzKZT8knao5YbVZ5iNHdaj1SibbsVdyreoWqeMPrNcNv7fbwLpmY2PrEQ8ttdtsdBy6fvpUoMk --prefix 1TEST
```

The tool will output three pieces of information:

```
Address: 1TEST9ecYeUg31ZxLrJ7e3ScYpkyRUjSr
Path: xpub_path'/1949567566/243133792/0/175
Address index: 158473
```

Where:

- `xpub_path'` represents the initial derivation path (`m/10495330'/0'/0'` if following the guide above)

The complete derivation path for this address is `m/10495330'/0'/0'/1949567566/243133792/0/175/0/158473`

### Import the Address in the Wallet

1. Create a new wallet using the same seed phrase or hardware wallet. Make sure to choose the correct script type that matches your prefix: Native SegWit (P2WPKH) for addresses starting with "bc1q", or "Legacy" (P2PKH) for addresses starting with "1".

![Vanity wallet choose script type](./assets/vanity_wallet_choose_script_type.png)

2. On the next screen, use the derivation path returned by the tool. In this example: `m/10495330'/0'/0'/1949567566/243133792/0/175`

![Vanity wallet derivation path](./assets/vanity_wallet_derivation_path.png)

3. Since software wallets use a default [gap limit](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki#address-gap-limit) of 20 addresses, this needs to be adjusted in the Advanced settings. The gap limit should be set to a value higher than the address index.

![Change gap limit](./assets/vanity_wallet_gap_limit.png)

### Verify the Address

1. In the Addresses tab, scroll down to the receive address index to verify the vanity address appears correctly.

![Confirm the address](./assets/vanity_wallet_confirm_the_address.png)

2. Once confirmed, the address is ready to receive funds securely. Double-click the address to open the default Receive screen.

![Receive screen](./assets/vanity_wallet_receive.png)

That's it! Easy, secure and awesome 😎👍

## Credits

This project is inspired by and builds upon the work of:

- **Kai Wolfram**, with [Senzu](https://github.com/kaiwolfram/senzu) - The original inspiration for this project, providing the foundation for BIP32-based vanity address generation
- **samr7**, with [Vanitygen](https://github.com/samr7/vanitygen) - The pioneering Bitcoin vanity address generator, particularly for the range-based hash160 matching technique
- **Peter Dettman**, with the [addition chain implementation](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/secp256k1/commit/f8ccd9befdb22824ef9a845a90e3db57c1307c11) - The efficient modular inverse calculation using Fermat's Little Theorem with an addition chain for secp256k1's p-2

Special thanks to:

- **Hal Finney** (RIP) - For _probably_ creating Bitcoin 😉

Commit message:

feat: add num addresses option (#71)
Adds a new CLI parameter --num-addresses that allows users to specify
how many matching addresses should be found before the program stops
automatically. This provides more flexibility for batch address
generation.

README.md, after:

# Address Artisan

Address Artisan is a vanity Bitcoin address generator based on [BIP32](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki) xpub key derivation and is:

- 🔒 **Secure**: Generates vanity addresses even for hardware wallets! 🤯
- ⚡ **Fast**: Built in Rust/OpenCL with fast public key derivation, prefix matching and GPU support. 🚀
- 🎯 **Versatile**: Supports both "Legacy" (P2PKH) and Native SegWit (P2WPKH). Your address, your style! 🎉

## Get the Address Artisan

You can install the tool using:

```bash
cargo install address-artisan
```

Or clone the repository and build it:

```bash
cargo build --release
```

## Usage

The tool requires 2 mandatory arguments (`xpub` and `prefix`) and accepts several optional arguments:

- `--xpub` (`-x`): Extended public key (obtainable from almost any Bitcoin wallet)
- `--prefix` (`-p`): Desired address prefix (must start with "1" or "bc1q")
- `--num-addresses` (`-n`): Number of addresses to find before stopping automatically (default: 1, 0 = never stop). Useful for generating multiple vanity addresses in a single run
- `--max-depth` (`-m`): Maximum depth of the last derivation path (default: 1000). A larger max-depth means better utilization of the key space and cache. However, an address may get buried in a large gap, and since [account discovery](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki#user-content-Account_discovery) is designed to be sequential, it may take time for the wallet to find it after increasing the gap limit. Testing suggests 100,000 is an optimal value, causing only a 3-second wallet freeze during setup.
- `--cpu-threads` (`-t`): Number of CPU threads to use (default: 0 = auto-detect physical cores)
- `--gpu` (`-g`): Enable GPU processing (excludes integrated/onboard GPUs). Can optionally specify GPU IDs: `--gpu 0,1` or `--gpu 0 1`. Without IDs, all available GPUs are used
- `--gpu-only`: Use only GPU for processing (no CPU, excludes integrated/onboard GPUs). Can be combined with `--gpu` to specify which GPUs to use

For detailed information, use the help command:

```bash
address-artisan --help
```

### Device Selection Examples

```bash
# CPU only (auto-detect cores)
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix>

# CPU with 8 threads
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> -t 8

# Use all available GPUs + CPU
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu

# Use GPU 0 + CPU
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu 0

# Use GPU 0 and GPU 2 + CPU
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu 0,2

# Use all GPUs, no CPU
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu-only

# Use only GPU 1, no CPU
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu 1 --gpu-only

# Use GPUs 0 and 1, plus CPU with 4 threads
address-artisan -x <xpub> -p <prefix> --gpu 0 1 -t 4
```

**Note:** If you specify an invalid GPU ID, the program will display the available GPUs on your system. Integrated/onboard GPUs are automatically excluded.

For a complete walkthrough with all steps and details, check the [Example](#example) section.

## ⚠️ **WARNING**

Yes, it's completely safe to use this tool. But be aware of the following:

- Don't send funds to the vanity address without first confirming it appears in the addresses list.
- Store the derivation path and address index to always be able to recover funds. It's even possible to save them on the [Bitcoin Blockchain](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/OP_RETURN).

Again, see the [Example](#example) section for a complete and safe walkthrough.

## BIP44 Compliance

While this tool is **not** (and cannot be) compliant with [BIP44](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki), it can be used with BIP44-compliant wallets. Here's how it works:

BIP44 standardizes 5 levels of derivation:

```
m / purpose' / coin_type' / account' / change / address_index
```

Where:

- `m`: Master key
- `purpose'`: Purpose identifier following [BIP43](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0043.mediawiki) (e.g., 44' for P2PKH)
- `coin_type'`: Coin identifier, following [SLIP44](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0044.md). 0' (0x80000000) for Bitcoin
- `account'`: Account number for funds organization - greater than or equal to 0' (0x80000000)
- `change`: Like a boolean flag - 0 (0x00) for receive addresses, 1 (0x01) for change addresses
- `address_index`: Address index

This tool brute-forces a path of the form:

```
xpub_path' / seed0 / seed1 / b / a / 0 / address_index
```

Where:

- `xpub_path'`: User-provided hardened derivation path
- `seed0/seed1`: 62-bit entropy for unique key space per run - each less than 0' (0x80000000)
- `b/a`: Two derivation paths for key space expansion - each less than 0' (0x80000000)
- `0`: Constant 0 (0x00) for BIP44-compliant wallet compatibility
- `address_index`: Address index within the account - less than _max_depth_ CLI argument

By maintaining 0 as the second-to-last derivation path, BIP44-compliant wallets will recognize the vanity address as the *address_index*th receive address when using `xpub_path' / seed0 / seed1 / b / a` as the wallet's input path.

## Example

The following example demonstrates the complete process of generating and using a vanity address with this tool. The [Sparrow](https://github.com/sparrowwallet/sparrow) wallet will be used for this demonstration.

### Get the xpub

First, a working wallet needs to be set up.

It's recommended to create a new wallet with a custom derivation path using a dedicated purpose for vanity addresses. There's no need to generate a new seed phrase or reset the hardware wallet - using a different derivation path allows keeping existing wallet funds completely separate.

1. Create a new wallet

Create a new wallet using either your seed phrase/private key or your hardware wallet.

![New wallet](./assets/new_p2pkh_wallet.png)

2. On the next screen, set up the derivation path. I propose to use the following path:

```
m/10495330'/0'/0'
```

This path uses:

- Purpose: 10495330' (which spells "vnty" in base58) for vanity addresses
- Coin type: 0' (0x80000000) for Bitcoin ([SLIP44](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0044.md))
- Account: 0' (0x80000000)

Note: Make sure to include the ' after each number to ensure hardened derivation.

![New wallet derivation path](./assets/new_wallet_derivation_path.png)

3. The next screen will display the xpub. In this example:
   `xpub6DRyCVn7t9e3DjUphcExjExY7NMw6mC4ZqzKZT8knao5YbVZ5iNHdaj1SibbsVdyreoWqeMPrNcNv7fbwLpmY2PrEQ8ttdtsdBy6fvpUoMk`

This value should be copied for the next step.

![New wallet xpub](./assets/new_wallet_xpub.png)

### Generate the Vanity Address

Run the tool with the xpub and desired prefix:

```
address-artisan --xpub xpub6DRyCVn7t9e3DjUphcExjExY7NMw6mC4ZqzKZT8knao5YbVZ5iNHdaj1SibbsVdyreoWqeMPrNcNv7fbwLpmY2PrEQ8ttdtsdBy6fvpUoMk --prefix 1TEST
```

The tool will output three pieces of information:

```
Address: 1TEST9ecYeUg31ZxLrJ7e3ScYpkyRUjSr
Path: xpub_path'/1949567566/243133792/0/175
Address index: 158473
```

Where:

- `xpub_path'` represents the initial derivation path (`m/10495330'/0'/0'` if following the guide above)

The complete derivation path for this address is `m/10495330'/0'/0'/1949567566/243133792/0/175/0/158473`

### Import the Address in the Wallet

1. Create a new wallet using the same seed phrase or hardware wallet. Make sure to choose the correct script type that matches your prefix: Native SegWit (P2WPKH) for addresses starting with "bc1q", or "Legacy" (P2PKH) for addresses starting with "1".

![Vanity wallet choose script type](./assets/vanity_wallet_choose_script_type.png)

2. On the next screen, use the derivation path returned by the tool. In this example: `m/10495330'/0'/0'/1949567566/243133792/0/175`

![Vanity wallet derivation path](./assets/vanity_wallet_derivation_path.png)

3. Since software wallets use a default [gap limit](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0044.mediawiki#address-gap-limit) of 20 addresses, this needs to be adjusted in the Advanced settings. The gap limit should be set to a value higher than the address index.

![Change gap limit](./assets/vanity_wallet_gap_limit.png)

### Verify the Address

1. In the Addresses tab, scroll down to the receive address index to verify the vanity address appears correctly.

![Confirm the address](./assets/vanity_wallet_confirm_the_address.png)

2. Once confirmed, the address is ready to receive funds securely. Double-click the address to open the default Receive screen.

![Receive screen](./assets/vanity_wallet_receive.png)

That's it! Easy, secure and awesome 😎👍

## Credits

This project is inspired by and builds upon the work of:

- **Kai Wolfram**, with [Senzu](https://github.com/kaiwolfram/senzu) - The original inspiration for this project, providing the foundation for BIP32-based vanity address generation
- **samr7**, with [Vanitygen](https://github.com/samr7/vanitygen) - The pioneering Bitcoin vanity address generator, particularly for the range-based hash160 matching technique
- **Peter Dettman**, with the [addition chain implementation](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/secp256k1/commit/f8ccd9befdb22824ef9a845a90e3db57c1307c11) - The efficient modular inverse calculation using Fermat's Little Theorem with an addition chain for secp256k1's p-2

Special thanks to:

- **Hal Finney** (RIP) - For _probably_ creating Bitcoin 😉
